NSG 3100: Unit 6 Urinary Elimination
Kidneys
Urine
Formed by nephrons
Renal corpuscle
Renal tubule
Formed by three processes
Filtration
Reabsorption
Secretion
Normal Structure and Function
Normal Structure and Function
Anuria
Oliguria
Polyuria
Nocturia
Dysuria
Hematuria
Urinary Issues
This Photo by Unknown author is licensed under CC BY.
Frequency
Urgency
Incontinence
Retention
Enuresis
Urinary tract infection
Neurogenic bladder
Urinary Issues
Stress Incontinence
Factors Influencing Urinary Elimination
Developmental factors
Psychosocial factors
Fluid and food intake
Medications
Muscle tone
Pathologic conditions
Surgical procedures
Altered Structure and Function
Developmental Factors
Infants
Preschoolers
School-age children
Older adults
Assessing
Nursing history
Physical assessment and hydration status
Assessment of urine
Diagnostic tests and procedures
Urine specimens in lab
Normal urine output should equal fluid intake
Approximately 60mL/hr
Minimum 30mL/hr or 0.5mL/Kg per hour
Assessing Urine
Volume
Color, clarity
Odor
Sterility
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-NC
Urinary System Laboratory Tests
Blood Urea Nitrogen
Creatinine
Urinalysis
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA
BUN
Average Adult: 10-20 mg/dL
< 10 mg/dL = low protein diet, malnutrition, liver damage, or
drinking excessive amounts of fluids
>20 mg/dL = Kidney injury or disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, blockage of the urinary tract, high-protein diet, severe burns, gastrointestinal bleeding, dehydration or heart failure
Normal Range
Male: 0.6 – 1.2 mg/dL
Female 0.5 – 1.1 mg/dL
Creatinine
Urinalysis
Specific gravity – 1.005 – 1.030
pH – 4.6 - 8
Protein - none
Glucose – few to none
Ketones - none
Micro analysis
UTI
24 – Hour Urine
How much creatinine?
What does it mean?
How do we collect?
Ultrasound
KUB
Pyelography
CT
Cystoscopy
Diagnostic Exams
Cystoscopy
Urinary Tract Infections
Urinary Tract Infections
In small groups complete the table below.  On the left place causes of Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs).  On the right side of the table, place appropriate teaching for those risk factors or causes.
Potential Nursing Diagnosis
Impaired Urinary Elimination
Functional Urinary Incontinence
Reflex Urinary Incontinence
Stress Urinary Incontinence
Total Urinary Incontinence
Urge Urinary Incontinence
Urinary Retention
Related Nursing Diagnosis
Risk for Infection
Low Self-esteem
Risk for Impaired Skin Integrity
Self-care Deficit
Risk for Deficient Fluid Volume or Excess Fluid Volume
Disturbed Body Image
Deficient Knowledge
Risk for Caregiver Role Strain
Risk for Social Isolation
Desired Outcomes
Maintain or restore a normal voiding pattern
Regain normal urine output
Prevent associated risks such as infection, skin breakdown, fluid and electrolyte imbalance, and lowered self-esteem
Perform toilet activities independently with or without assistive devices
Contain urine with the appropriate device, catheter, ostomy appliance, or absorbent product
Urinary Incontinence
Incontinence – Several types
In small groups complete the table below.
In the left column is a type of incontinence.
In the middle column place, insert a definition of this type of incontinence in your own words.
In the right column, insert patient teaching and nursing interventions to prevent these types of incontinence.
Nursing Diagnoses – 3 Issues
Incontinence Issues
Functional Urinary Incontinence
Reflex Urinary Incontinence
Stress Urinary Incontinence
Overflow Urinary Incontinence
Urge Urinary Incontinence
Total Urinary Incontinence
Retention Issues
Urinary Retention
Incontinence or Retention
Impaired Urinary Elimination
26
Nursing Interventions
Promoting fluid intake
Maintaining normal voiding patterns
Assisting with toileting
Preventing urinary tract infections
Continence (bladder) training
Bladder training
Habit training
Prompted voiding
Assessing medications
27
Nursing Interventions
Pelvic muscle exercises
Maintaining skin integrity
Performing urinary catheterizations and external draining devices
Dietary Alterations for bladder issues
Community Resources
Infection control
Tricks to help start the flow of urine
Practice Guidelines
28
Urinary retention
Managing Urinary Retention
Common causes of urinary retention include prostatic hypertrophy, surgery, and some medications.
Causes of chronic urinary retention can include paraplegia, quadriplegia, multiple sclerosis, and urethral or perineal trauma.
How can urinary retention lead to fluid volume overload?  What can long-term retention issues do to the muscles in the area?
30
Interventions for Urinary Retention
Medications
Catheterization
Surgery
Bladder Training
Fluids
Assess for Retention
31
Bladder Retraining
Bladder Retraining
Establish a regular voiding schedule and encourage voiding at those times whether the client feels the urge to go or not—usually every 1-2 hours
Slowly lengthen intervals between voids. Regulate fluid intake.
Avoid significant fluid intake during evening hours (none after 1800) to prevent the need to void during the night. Encourage fluids between 6am and 1800pm.
Avoid beverages that encourage urinary flow such as citrus juices, carbonated beverages, alcohol, and caffeine because these are all bladder irritants, increasing risk of incontinence.
33
Bladder Retraining
If client is taking diuretics (such as Lasix), give in the morning (never at night)
Adequate fluid intake is necessary to ensure adequate urine production.
Apply protector pads to keep the bed/linen dry
Pelvic floor exercises (Kegel's)
Provide positive reinforcement to encourage continence.
34
External urinary devices
Most frequent healthcare associated infection is UTI, and indwelling catheters cause 80% of these.
CAUTI- UTI while catheter is in placed or within 48hrs of its removal
Hospitals will not be reimbursed for CAUTI’s by Medicare or Medicaid
Latex Considerations
Size Considerations (14, 16, 18 for adults)
Balloon Size (5-10ml most common, 20ml after prostate surgery)
Sterile technique!
Indwelling (internal) catheters
Advance catheter about 5cm (2in) further after you get urine return
Bag needs to stay below the level of the bladder ALWAYS!
No dependent loops
Closed system, never disconnect tubing
Attach to stationary part of bedframe, never side rails or moveable sections
Catheter maintenance
Indwelling (internal) catheters
Discuss the use of an external urinary device with the client.
Apply clean gloves to examine the client’s penis for swelling or excoriation that would contraindicate use of the condom catheter.
Choose the correct size per manufacturer.
Perform hand hygiene, provide privacy.
Clean the genital area and thoroughly dry.
External Catheters
Apply and secure the condom by rolling the condom smoothly over the penis leaving 1 inch between the end of the penis and the rubber or plastic connecting tube.
Securely attach the urinary drainage system. Make sure that the tip of the penis is NOT touching the condom and the condom is not twisted. Attach the bag to the frame of the bed.
Remove gloves and wash hands. Monitor output.
External Catheters
Other Considerations
Foods and Beverages
Spicy foods
Carbonated beverages
Acidic food and drinks
Caffeine
Alcoholic Beverages
41
Evaluation
Labs
Urinary Output
I & O’s
No UTI’s
What are 3 things you already knew about today’s lecture content?
What are 2 things you learned today?
What is one question you still have?
Class Summary
Reference
Yoost, B. L., & Crawford, L. R. (2023). Fundamentals of nursing: Active learning for collaborative practice (3rd ed.). Elsevier.